Miscellaneous code cleanups, including the following:

  o Cleaned up inconsistencies in checks for arity of primitives in eval.c
    Removed checks from functions implementing language features "repeat",
    "while", and "function", consistent with other language features (lack
    of checks does not cause a crash --- missing arguments just appear
    to be NULL).  Changed the check in do_set to the standard form
    using checkArity, with names.c changed to make the arity be 2 rather
    than -1.

  o The "spare" bit in sxpinfo is renamed to "misc", and the documentation 
    in the code and in R-ints.texi is changed to reflect this, and to 
    document that this bit is actually used.

  o The documentation before do_seq in seq.c is changed to be correct
    (seq.int is no longer SPECIAL), and the incorrect reference to
    seq.int in R-ints.texi is removed.

  o The fixup_NaRm function defined in summary.c is moved to match.c,
    where it belongs.  It is now properly declared in Rinternals.h,
    rather than the definition in summary.c being surreptitiously
    referenced as an extern from logic.c.

  o Defined an isRaw macro globally for consistency with other such macros, 
    deleting several local definitions of this.    

  o Fixed problem with recompilation with byte compilation not enabled.

  o Fixed (by a kludge, not a proper fix) a bug in the "tre" package that
    shows up when WCHAR_MAX doesn't fit in an "int".  The kludge reduces
    WCHAR_MAX to fit, but really the "int" variables ought to be bigger.
    (This problem shows up on a Raspberry Pi running Raspbian.)  Also fixed 
    a going-past-end-of array bug (that probably never happened).

  o Code in R-2.15.0 exists for maintaining a cache of primitive objects,
    but this code forgets to ever actually enter a primitve into the cache.
    This is now done (in mkPRIMSXP).

  o Updated R-admin to discuss derived but distributed files (eg configure).

See also entries in NEWS for other mods that merit description there.
